examples/python_hello_world/TEST_TRACEABILITY_GUIDE.md, before:

# Test Traceability Guide: OSQAr Example (TSIM)

## Overview

This guide explains how the OSQAr example demonstrates **end-to-end traceability** from ISO 26262 safety goals through test results, and how this traceability chain can be automated for compliance artifact generation.

## Traceability Chain

```
ISO 26262 Safety Goal
    ↓
Safety Requirement (REQ_SAFETY_*)
    ↓
Functional Requirement (REQ_FUNC_*)
    ↓
Architectural Specification (ARCH_*)
    ↓
Implementation Code (src/tsim.py)
    Code contains docstring requirement IDs
    ↓
Unit Tests (tests/test_tsim.py)
    Tests mapped to TEST_* requirement IDs
    ↓
JUnit XML Test Results (test_results.xml)
    Machine-readable test execution data
    ↓
Sphinx Documentation (05_test_results.rst)
    Auto-imports and cross-references test results
    ↓
HTML Documentation with Traceability Matrix
    Interactive compliance artifact for ISO 26262 qualification
```

## File Structure

```
examples/python_hello_world/
├── conf.py                          # Sphinx configuration with requirements ID regex
├── index.rst                        # Documentation entry point (Table of Contents)
├── 01_requirements.rst              # Safety & functional requirements (needs objects)
├── 02_architecture.rst              # System architecture with PlantUML diagrams
├── 03_verification.rst              # Test plan with TEST_* needs definitions
├── 04_implementation.rst            # Code examples with requirement annotations
├── 05_test_results.rst              # This file - test integration & traceability
│
├── src/
│   ├── __init__.py                  # Makes src a Python package
│   └── tsim.py                      # Implementation with docstring requirement IDs
│
├── tests/
│   ├── __init__.py                  # Makes tests a Python package
│   └── test_tsim.py                 # Test suite with TEST_* ID references
│
├── test_results.xml                 # JUnit XML output from pytest
├── diagrams/                        # PlantUML architecture diagrams
└── _build/html/                     # Generated HTML documentation
    ├── index.html
    ├── 01_requirements.html         # Requirements with needs links
    ├── 02_architecture.html         # Architecture with embedded diagrams
    ├── 03_verification.html         # Test plan with traceability matrix
    ├── 04_implementation.html       # Code examples
    └── 05_test_results.html         # Test results & traceability
```

## How Requirements Are Traced to Tests

### 1. Requirement Definition (01_requirements.rst)

Each requirement is defined as a `.. need::` Sphinx directive with a unique ID:

```rst
.. need:: (SAFETY) Detect overheat within 100ms to prevent thermal damage.
   :id: REQ_SAFETY_002
   :status: active
   :tags: safety-critical, timing
```

### 2. Functional Specification (01_requirements.rst & 02_architecture.rst)

Functional requirements break down safety requirements into implementation-specific details:

```rst
.. need:: (FUNCTIONAL) Temperature sensor shall convert 12-bit ADC input to 0.1°C units.
   :id: REQ_FUNC_001
   :status: active
   :links: REQ_SAFETY_001, ARCH_FUNC_001
```

### 3. Architecture Definition (02_architecture.rst & 03_verification.rst)

Architecture requirements specify design choices:

```rst
.. need:: (ARCHITECTURE) Implement 5-sample moving average filter.
   :id: ARCH_FUNC_002
   :status: active
   :links: REQ_FUNC_002
```

### 4. Test Case Definition (03_verification.rst)

Test cases are defined as `.. need::` objects with TEST_* IDs:

```rst
.. need:: (TEST) TEST_CONVERSION_001: Sensor readings across full range shall convert correctly.
   :id: TEST_CONVERSION_001
   :status: active
   :tags: unit-test
   :links: REQ_FUNC_001, ARCH_FUNC_001
```

### 5. Test Implementation (tests/test_tsim.py)

Test code includes docstrings with TEST_* IDs for traceability:

```python
def test_conversion_full_range(self):
    """TEST_CONVERSION_001: Full range conversion accuracy"""
    # Test implementation
```

### 6. Execution & Results (test_results.xml)

JUnit XML captures test execution results:

```xml
<testsuite>
  <testcase classname="tests.test_tsim.TestSensorDriver"
            name="test_conversion_full_range"
            time="0.002">
    <!-- PASSED (no element = success) -->
  </testcase>
</testsuite>
```

### 7. Documentation Integration (05_test_results.rst)

Documentation references test requirements and links to implementation:

```rst
.. requirement:: TEST_CONVERSION_001 (:need:`TEST_CONVERSION_001`)
   
   Maps to: REQ_FUNC_001 → ARCH_FUNC_001
   Implementation: src/tsim.py::SensorDriver.read_adc()
   Test Code: tests/test_tsim.py::TestSensorDriver.test_conversion_full_range()
```

### 8. HTML Artifact (05_test_results.html)

Sphinx generates interactive HTML with:
- Links from test → requirement
- Links from requirement → code
- Cross-references in traceability matrix
- Searchable index

## Running Tests & Generating Artifacts

### Step 1: Run Unit Tests

```bash
cd examples/python_hello_world
poetry install
poetry run pytest tests/test_tsim.py -v --junit-xml=test_results.xml
```

**Output**:
```
13 passed in 0.02s
generated xml file: test_results.xml
```

### Step 2: Build Documentation

```bash
poetry run sphinx-build -b html . _build/html
```

**Output**:
```
build succeeded, 1 warning.
The HTML pages are in _build/html.
```

### Step 3: View Results

```bash
open _build/html/index.html  # Or use your browser to navigate to 05_test_results.html
```

The HTML includes:
- All requirements with traceability links
- Test results with pass/fail status
- Architecture diagrams
- Searchable traceability matrix
- Code examples with requirement annotations

## Test Results Interpretation

### Test Results Summary

| Test Case | Requirement | Status | Time | Coverage |
|-----------|------------|--------|------|----------|
| test_conversion_full_range | TEST_CONVERSION_001 → REQ_FUNC_001 | ✓ PASS | 0.002s | ADC range |
| test_filter_noise_rejection | TEST_FILTER_001 → REQ_FUNC_002 | ✓ PASS | 0.003s | Noise attenuation |
| test_threshold_detection | TEST_THRESHOLD_001 → REQ_FUNC_003 | ✓ PASS | 0.002s | Threshold logic |
| test_hysteresis_deadband | TEST_HYSTERESIS_001 → REQ_FUNC_004 | ✓ PASS | 0.002s | Hysteresis bands |
| test_end_to_end_latency | TEST_END_TO_END_001 → REQ_SAFETY_002 | ✓ PASS | 0.005s | Timing budget |
| test_fail_safe_on_persistent_errors | TEST_FAIL_SAFE_001 → ARCH_ERROR_002 | ✓ PASS | 0.004s | Error handling |

### Compliance Verification

✓ All 13 tests passing → All requirements verified
✓ All requirements traced to tests → Complete coverage
✓ No orphaned requirements → No untested code paths
✓ No orphaned tests → All tests mapped to requirements

## Automated Traceability Workflow

### For CI/CD Integration

#### GitHub Actions Example

```yaml
name: Build & Test with Traceability

on: [push, pull_request]

jobs:
  compliance:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v3
      
      - name: Set up Python
        uses: actions/setup-python@v4
        with:
          python-version: '3.11'
      
      - name: Install dependencies
        run: |
          cd examples/python_hello_world
          pip install poetry
          poetry install
      
      - name: Run tests with JUnit output
        run: |
          cd examples/python_hello_world
          poetry run pytest tests/test_tsim.py \
            -v \
            --junit-xml=test_results.xml \
            --cov=src
      
      - name: Verify no test failures
        if: failure()
        run: exit 1
      
      - name: Build documentation (auto-imports test results)
        run: |
          cd examples/python_hello_world
          poetry run sphinx-build -b html . _build/html
      
      - name: Deploy compliance artifacts
        uses: actions/upload-artifact@v3
        with:
          name: compliance-documentation
          path: examples/python_hello_world/_build/html/
```

#### Local Development Workflow

```bash
#!/bin/bash
# build-and-test.sh - Local development workflow

set -e  # Exit on error

cd examples/python_hello_world

echo "🔍 Running code style checks..."
poetry run black --check src tests

echo "🧪 Running unit tests..."
poetry run pytest tests/test_tsim.py \
  -v \
  --junit-xml=test_results.xml \
  --cov=src \
  --cov-report=term-missing

echo "📚 Building documentation..."
poetry run sphinx-build -b html . _build/html

echo "✅ All checks passed!"
echo "📖 Documentation: _build/html/index.html"
```

## Extending Test Traceability for Domain-Specific Examples

### Medical Device Example

Create `examples/medical_device/` with domain-specific requirements:

```rst
.. need:: (SAFETY_MEDICAL) Sensor shall detect fever (>38°C) within 2 seconds.
   :id: REQ_MEDICAL_SAFETY_001
   :status: active
   :links: REQ_FUNC_001  # Reuse TSIM core requirement
```

Inherit test base classes:

```python
# examples/medical_device/tests/test_tsim_medical.py
from hello_world.tests.test_tsim import TestSensorDriver
from hello_world.src.tsim import TSIM

class TestMedicalTSIM(TestSensorDriver):
    """Medical-specific test cases"""
    
    def test_fever_detection_latency(self):
        """REQ_MEDICAL_SAFETY_001: Detect fever within 2 seconds"""
        # Medical domain requires tighter latency
        assert latency < 2.0
```

Generate domain-specific compliance artifacts:

```bash
cd examples/medical_device
poetry run pytest tests/ --junit-xml=test_results_medical.xml
poetry run sphinx-build -b html . _build/html
```

## Test Traceability Metrics

### Coverage Analysis

```python
# From pytest output with --cov flag
Name                 Stmts   Miss  Cover
----------------------------------------
src/tsim.py            127      0   100%
tests/test_tsim.py     340      0   100%
----------------------------------------
TOTAL                  467      0   100%
```

### Requirement Coverage

- Total Requirements: 18 (REQ_* + ARCH_*)
- Tested Requirements: 18 (100%)
- Test Cases: 13
- Tests per Requirement: 1.2 (average)
- Critical (Safety) Requirements: 3
- Critical Test Coverage: 100%

### Test Execution Time

```
Test Suite Execution:
  Total Time: 0.024s
  Average per Test: 0.0018s
  Slowest Test: test_end_to_end_latency (0.005s)
  
Documentation Build:
  Total Time: 2.3s (includes PlantUML SVG rendering)
  HTML Pages: 6 (index + 5 sections)
  Traceability Links: 47
```

## Quality Gates

Use these metrics to enforce compliance:

```python
# .pre-commit-hook.py - Prevent commits without test coverage

def check_test_coverage():
    """Fail if any requirement lacks test case"""
    requirements = parse_needs('01_requirements.rst')
    tests = parse_junit('test_results.xml')
    
    untested = requirements - tests
    if untested:
        raise Exception(f"Untested requirements: {untested}")
    
    return 0

def check_documentation_build():
    """Fail if documentation doesn't build"""
    result = subprocess.run(
        ['sphinx-build', '-b', 'html', '.', '_build/html'],
        capture_output=True
    )
    return result.returncode
```

## Traceability Report Generation

Generate a compliance report showing full traceability:

```bash
# Generate CSV traceability matrix
poetry run python scripts/generate_traceability_csv.py \
  --requirements 01_requirements.rst \
  --tests test_results.xml \
  --output traceability_matrix.csv
```

**Output Example**:
```csv
Requirement ID,Type,Description,Test Case,Status,Coverage
REQ_SAFETY_001,SAFETY,Prevent thermal damage,TEST_THRESHOLD_001;TEST_END_TO_END_001,PASS,2/2
REQ_FUNC_001,FUNCTIONAL,Convert ADC to °C,TEST_CONVERSION_001,PASS,1/1
ARCH_FUNC_001,ARCHITECTURE,Sensor driver component,TEST_CONVERSION_001,PASS,1/1
...
```

## Best Practices

1. **Keep TEST_* IDs in sync**: When modifying tests, update docstrings with TEST_* IDs
2. **Run tests before documentation build**: Ensure test_results.xml is current
3. **Commit test results**: Include test_results.xml in version control for CI/CD
4. **Use meaningful test names**: Test function names should match TEST_* IDs
5. **Document test failure remediation**: Update requirements or code if tests fail
6. **Automate compliance checks**: Use pre-commit hooks to enforce traceability
7. **Regular traceability audits**: Periodically verify no orphaned requirements/tests

## Next Steps

1. **Set up CI/CD**: Use GitHub Actions to automatically run tests and build documentation
2. **Add domain-specific examples**: Create medical, automotive, robotics variants
3. **Implement requirements gateway**: Enforce that all requirements have tests
4. **Create automated traceability reports**: Generate PDF compliance artifacts
5. **Integrate with requirements management tools**: Link to external specs (e.g., Polarion, Jama)

## References

- [Sphinx-Needs Documentation](https://sphinx-needs.readthedocs.io/)
- [ISO 26262 Standard](https://www.iso.org/standard/68383.html)
- [pytest Documentation](https://docs.pytest.org/)
- [JUnit XML Format](https://llg.cubic.org/docs/junit/)

Commit message:

Simplify installs and align evidence workflows
- Split optional tooling into Poetry groups (evidence/ide) and regenerate lockfile
- Align CI and example scripts with optional evidence tooling installs
- Remove legacy CLI doc paths; update docs/README/contributing for consistency
- Fix RST indentation issues (warnings-as-errors clean)

examples/python_hello_world/TEST_TRACEABILITY_GUIDE.md, after:

# Test Traceability Guide: OSQAr Example (TSIM)

## Overview

This guide explains how the OSQAr example demonstrates **end-to-end traceability** from ISO 26262 safety goals through test results, and how this traceability chain can be automated for compliance artifact generation.

## Traceability Chain

```
ISO 26262 Safety Goal
    ↓
Safety Requirement (REQ_SAFETY_*)
    ↓
Functional Requirement (REQ_FUNC_*)
    ↓
Architectural Specification (ARCH_*)
    ↓
Implementation Code (src/tsim.py)
    Code contains docstring requirement IDs
    ↓
Unit Tests (tests/test_tsim.py)
    Tests mapped to TEST_* requirement IDs
    ↓
JUnit XML Test Results (test_results.xml)
    Machine-readable test execution data
    ↓
Sphinx Documentation (05_test_results.rst)
    Auto-imports and cross-references test results
    ↓
HTML Documentation with Traceability Matrix
    Interactive compliance artifact for ISO 26262 qualification
```

## File Structure

```
examples/python_hello_world/
├── conf.py                          # Sphinx configuration with requirements ID regex
├── index.rst                        # Documentation entry point (Table of Contents)
├── 01_requirements.rst              # Safety & functional requirements (needs objects)
├── 02_architecture.rst              # System architecture with PlantUML diagrams
├── 03_verification.rst              # Test plan with TEST_* needs definitions
├── 04_implementation.rst            # Code examples with requirement annotations
├── 05_test_results.rst              # This file - test integration & traceability
│
├── src/
│   ├── __init__.py                  # Makes src a Python package
│   └── tsim.py                      # Implementation with docstring requirement IDs
│
├── tests/
│   ├── __init__.py                  # Makes tests a Python package
│   └── test_tsim.py                 # Test suite with TEST_* ID references
│
├── test_results.xml                 # JUnit XML output from pytest
├── diagrams/                        # PlantUML architecture diagrams
└── _build/html/                     # Generated HTML documentation
    ├── index.html
    ├── 01_requirements.html         # Requirements with needs links
    ├── 02_architecture.html         # Architecture with embedded diagrams
    ├── 03_verification.html         # Test plan with traceability matrix
    ├── 04_implementation.html       # Code examples
    └── 05_test_results.html         # Test results & traceability
```

## How Requirements Are Traced to Tests

### 1. Requirement Definition (01_requirements.rst)

Each requirement is defined as a `.. need::` Sphinx directive with a unique ID:

```rst
.. need:: (SAFETY) Detect overheat within 100ms to prevent thermal damage.
   :id: REQ_SAFETY_002
   :status: active
   :tags: safety-critical, timing
```

### 2. Functional Specification (01_requirements.rst & 02_architecture.rst)

Functional requirements break down safety requirements into implementation-specific details:

```rst
.. need:: (FUNCTIONAL) Temperature sensor shall convert 12-bit ADC input to 0.1°C units.
   :id: REQ_FUNC_001
   :status: active
   :links: REQ_SAFETY_001, ARCH_FUNC_001
```

### 3. Architecture Definition (02_architecture.rst & 03_verification.rst)

Architecture requirements specify design choices:

```rst
.. need:: (ARCHITECTURE) Implement 5-sample moving average filter.
   :id: ARCH_FUNC_002
   :status: active
   :links: REQ_FUNC_002
```

### 4. Test Case Definition (03_verification.rst)

Test cases are defined as `.. need::` objects with TEST_* IDs:

```rst
.. need:: (TEST) TEST_CONVERSION_001: Sensor readings across full range shall convert correctly.
   :id: TEST_CONVERSION_001
   :status: active
   :tags: unit-test
   :links: REQ_FUNC_001, ARCH_FUNC_001
```

### 5. Test Implementation (tests/test_tsim.py)

Test code includes docstrings with TEST_* IDs for traceability:

```python
def test_conversion_full_range(self):
    """TEST_CONVERSION_001: Full range conversion accuracy"""
    # Test implementation
```

### 6. Execution & Results (test_results.xml)

JUnit XML captures test execution results:

```xml
<testsuite>
  <testcase classname="tests.test_tsim.TestSensorDriver"
            name="test_conversion_full_range"
            time="0.002">
    <!-- PASSED (no element = success) -->
  </testcase>
</testsuite>
```

### 7. Documentation Integration (05_test_results.rst)

Documentation references test requirements and links to implementation:

```rst
.. requirement:: TEST_CONVERSION_001 (:need:`TEST_CONVERSION_001`)
   
   Maps to: REQ_FUNC_001 → ARCH_FUNC_001
   Implementation: src/tsim.py::SensorDriver.read_adc()
   Test Code: tests/test_tsim.py::TestSensorDriver.test_conversion_full_range()
```

### 8. HTML Artifact (05_test_results.html)

Sphinx generates interactive HTML with:
- Links from test → requirement
- Links from requirement → code
- Cross-references in traceability matrix
- Searchable index

## Running Tests & Generating Artifacts

Recommended: run the end-to-end script (tests + coverage + docs) from this directory:

```bash
poetry install --with evidence
./build-and-test.sh
```

### Step 1: Run Unit Tests

```bash
cd examples/python_hello_world
poetry install
poetry run pytest tests/test_tsim.py -v --junit-xml=test_results.xml
```

**Output**:
```
13 passed in 0.02s
generated xml file: test_results.xml
```

### Step 2: Build Documentation

```bash
poetry run sphinx-build -b html . _build/html
```

**Output**:
```
build succeeded, 1 warning.
The HTML pages are in _build/html.
```

### Step 3: View Results

```bash
open _build/html/index.html  # Or use your browser to navigate to 05_test_results.html
```

The HTML includes:
- All requirements with traceability links
- Test results with pass/fail status
- Architecture diagrams
- Searchable traceability matrix
- Code examples with requirement annotations

## Test Results Interpretation

### Test Results Summary

| Test Case | Requirement | Status | Time | Coverage |
|-----------|------------|--------|------|----------|
| test_conversion_full_range | TEST_CONVERSION_001 → REQ_FUNC_001 | ✓ PASS | 0.002s | ADC range |
| test_filter_noise_rejection | TEST_FILTER_001 → REQ_FUNC_002 | ✓ PASS | 0.003s | Noise attenuation |
| test_threshold_detection | TEST_THRESHOLD_001 → REQ_FUNC_003 | ✓ PASS | 0.002s | Threshold logic |
| test_hysteresis_deadband | TEST_HYSTERESIS_001 → REQ_FUNC_004 | ✓ PASS | 0.002s | Hysteresis bands |
| test_end_to_end_latency | TEST_END_TO_END_001 → REQ_SAFETY_002 | ✓ PASS | 0.005s | Timing budget |
| test_fail_safe_on_persistent_errors | TEST_FAIL_SAFE_001 → ARCH_ERROR_002 | ✓ PASS | 0.004s | Error handling |

### Compliance Verification

✓ All 13 tests passing → All requirements verified
✓ All requirements traced to tests → Complete coverage
✓ No orphaned requirements → No untested code paths
✓ No orphaned tests → All tests mapped to requirements

## Automated Traceability Workflow

### For CI/CD Integration

#### GitHub Actions Example

```yaml
name: Build & Test with Traceability

on: [push, pull_request]

jobs:
  compliance:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v3
      
      - name: Set up Python
        uses: actions/setup-python@v4
        with:
          python-version: '3.11'
      
      - name: Install dependencies
        run: |
          cd examples/python_hello_world
          pip install poetry
          poetry install
      
      - name: Run tests with JUnit output
        run: |
          cd examples/python_hello_world
          poetry run pytest tests/test_tsim.py \
            -v \
            --junit-xml=test_results.xml \
            --cov=src
      
      - name: Verify no test failures
        if: failure()
        run: exit 1
      
      - name: Build documentation (auto-imports test results)
        run: |
          cd examples/python_hello_world
          poetry run sphinx-build -b html . _build/html
      
      - name: Deploy compliance artifacts
        uses: actions/upload-artifact@v3
        with:
          name: compliance-documentation
          path: examples/python_hello_world/_build/html/
```

#### Local Development Workflow

```bash
#!/bin/bash
# build-and-test.sh - Local development workflow

set -e  # Exit on error

cd examples/python_hello_world

echo "🔍 Running code style checks..."
poetry run black --check src tests

echo "🧪 Running unit tests..."
poetry run pytest tests/test_tsim.py \
  -v \
  --junit-xml=test_results.xml \
  --cov=src \
  --cov-report=term-missing

echo "📚 Building documentation..."
poetry run sphinx-build -b html . _build/html

echo "✅ All checks passed!"
echo "📖 Documentation: _build/html/index.html"
```

## Extending Test Traceability for Domain-Specific Examples

### Medical Device Example

Create `examples/medical_device/` with domain-specific requirements:

```rst
.. need:: (SAFETY_MEDICAL) Sensor shall detect fever (>38°C) within 2 seconds.
   :id: REQ_MEDICAL_SAFETY_001
   :status: active
   :links: REQ_FUNC_001  # Reuse TSIM core requirement
```

Inherit test base classes:

```python
# examples/medical_device/tests/test_tsim_medical.py
from hello_world.tests.test_tsim import TestSensorDriver
from hello_world.src.tsim import TSIM

class TestMedicalTSIM(TestSensorDriver):
    """Medical-specific test cases"""
    
    def test_fever_detection_latency(self):
        """REQ_MEDICAL_SAFETY_001: Detect fever within 2 seconds"""
        # Medical domain requires tighter latency
        assert latency < 2.0
```

Generate domain-specific compliance artifacts:

```bash
cd examples/medical_device
poetry run pytest tests/ --junit-xml=test_results_medical.xml
poetry run sphinx-build -b html . _build/html
```

## Test Traceability Metrics

### Coverage Analysis

```python
# From pytest output with --cov flag
Name                 Stmts   Miss  Cover
----------------------------------------
src/tsim.py            127      0   100%
tests/test_tsim.py     340      0   100%
----------------------------------------
TOTAL                  467      0   100%
```

### Requirement Coverage

- Total Requirements: 18 (REQ_* + ARCH_*)
- Tested Requirements: 18 (100%)
- Test Cases: 13
- Tests per Requirement: 1.2 (average)
- Critical (Safety) Requirements: 3
- Critical Test Coverage: 100%

### Test Execution Time

```
Test Suite Execution:
  Total Time: 0.024s
  Average per Test: 0.0018s
  Slowest Test: test_end_to_end_latency (0.005s)
  
Documentation Build:
  Total Time: 2.3s (includes PlantUML SVG rendering)
  HTML Pages: 6 (index + 5 sections)
  Traceability Links: 47
```

## Quality Gates

Use these metrics to enforce compliance:

```python
# .pre-commit-hook.py - Prevent commits without test coverage

def check_test_coverage():
    """Fail if any requirement lacks test case"""
    requirements = parse_needs('01_requirements.rst')
    tests = parse_junit('test_results.xml')
    
    untested = requirements - tests
    if untested:
        raise Exception(f"Untested requirements: {untested}")
    
    return 0

def check_documentation_build():
    """Fail if documentation doesn't build"""
    result = subprocess.run(
        ['sphinx-build', '-b', 'html', '.', '_build/html'],
        capture_output=True
    )
    return result.returncode
```

## Traceability Report Generation

Generate a compliance report showing full traceability:

```bash
# Generate CSV traceability matrix
poetry run python scripts/generate_traceability_csv.py \
  --requirements 01_requirements.rst \
  --tests test_results.xml \
  --output traceability_matrix.csv
```

**Output Example**:
```csv
Requirement ID,Type,Description,Test Case,Status,Coverage
REQ_SAFETY_001,SAFETY,Prevent thermal damage,TEST_THRESHOLD_001;TEST_END_TO_END_001,PASS,2/2
REQ_FUNC_001,FUNCTIONAL,Convert ADC to °C,TEST_CONVERSION_001,PASS,1/1
ARCH_FUNC_001,ARCHITECTURE,Sensor driver component,TEST_CONVERSION_001,PASS,1/1
...
```

## Best Practices

1. **Keep TEST_* IDs in sync**: When modifying tests, update docstrings with TEST_* IDs
2. **Run tests before documentation build**: Ensure test_results.xml is current
3. **Commit test results**: Include test_results.xml in version control for CI/CD
4. **Use meaningful test names**: Test function names should match TEST_* IDs
5. **Document test failure remediation**: Update requirements or code if tests fail
6. **Automate compliance checks**: Use pre-commit hooks to enforce traceability
7. **Regular traceability audits**: Periodically verify no orphaned requirements/tests

## Next Steps

1. **Set up CI/CD**: Use GitHub Actions to automatically run tests and build documentation
2. **Add domain-specific examples**: Create medical, automotive, robotics variants
3. **Implement requirements gateway**: Enforce that all requirements have tests
4. **Create automated traceability reports**: Generate PDF compliance artifacts
5. **Integrate with requirements management tools**: Link to external specs (e.g., Polarion, Jama)

## References

- [Sphinx-Needs Documentation](https://sphinx-needs.readthedocs.io/)
- [ISO 26262 Standard](https://www.iso.org/standard/68383.html)
- [pytest Documentation](https://docs.pytest.org/)
- [JUnit XML Format](https://llg.cubic.org/docs/junit/)
